Happy families are all alike; every unhappy family is unhappy in its own

way.



Everything was in confusion in the Oblonskys’ house. The wife had

discovered that the husband was carrying on an intrigue with a French

girl, who had been a governess in their family, and she had announced to

her husband that she could not go on living in the same house with him.

This position of affairs had now lasted three days, and not only the

husband and wife themselves, but all the members of their family and

household, were painfully conscious of it. Every person in the house

felt that there was no sense in their living together, and that the

stray people brought together by chance in any inn had more in common

with one another than they, the members of the family and household of

the Oblonskys. The wife did not leave her own room, the husband had not

been at home for three days. The children ran wild all over the house;

the English governess quarreled with the housekeeper, and wrote to a

friend asking her to look out for a new situation for her; the man-cook

had walked off the day before just at dinner time; the kitchen-maid, and

the coachman had given warning.



Three days after the quarrel, Prince Stepan Arkadyevitch Oblonsky—Stiva,

as he was called in the fashionable world—woke up at his usual hour,

that is, at eight o’clock in the morning, not in his wife’s bedroom, but

on the leather-covered sofa in his study. He turned over his stout,

well-cared-for person on the springy sofa, as though he would sink into

a long sleep again; he vigorously embraced the pillow on the other side

and buried his face in it; but all at once he jumped up, sat up on the

sofa, and opened his eyes.



"Yes, yes, how was it now?" he thought, going over his dream. "Now, how

was it? To be sure! Alabin was giving a dinner at Darmstadt; no, not

Darmstadt, but something American. Yes, but then, Darmstadt was in

America. Yes, Alabin was giving a dinner on glass tables, and the tables

sang, _Il mio tesoro_—not _Il mio tesoro_ though, but something better,

and there were some sort of little decanters on the table, and they were

women, too," he remembered.



Stepan Arkadyevitch’s eyes twinkled gaily, and he pondered with a smile.

"Yes, it was nice, very nice. There was a great deal more that was

delightful, only there’s no putting it into words, or even expressing it

in one’s thoughts awake." And noticing a gleam of light peeping in

beside one of the serge curtains, he cheerfully dropped his feet over

the edge of the sofa, and felt about with them for his slippers, a

present on his last birthday, worked for him by his wife on gold-colored

morocco. And, as he had done every day for the last nine years, he

stretched out his hand, without getting up, towards the place where his

dressing-gown always hung in his bedroom. And thereupon he suddenly

remembered that he was not sleeping in his wife’s room, but in his

study, and why: the smile vanished from his face, he knitted his brows.



"Ah, ah, ah! Oo!..." he muttered, recalling everything that had

happened. And again every detail of his quarrel with his wife was

present to his imagination, all the hopelessness of his position, and

worst of all, his own fault.



"Yes, she won’t forgive me, and she can’t forgive me. And the most awful

thing about it is that it’s all my fault—all my fault, though I’m not to

blame. That’s the point of the whole situation," he reflected. "Oh, oh,

oh!" he kept repeating in despair, as he remembered the acutely painful

sensations caused him by this quarrel.



Most unpleasant of all was the first minute when, on coming, happy and

good-humored, from the theater, with a huge pear in his hand for his

wife, he had not found his wife in the drawing-room, to his surprise had

not found her in the study either, and saw her at last in her bedroom

with the unlucky letter that revealed everything in her hand.



She, his Dolly, forever fussing and worrying over household details, and

limited in her ideas, as he considered, was sitting perfectly still with

the letter in her hand, looking at him with an expression of horror,

despair, and indignation.



"What’s this? this?" she asked, pointing to the letter.



And at this recollection, Stepan Arkadyevitch, as is so often the case,

was not so much annoyed at the fact itself as at the way in which he had

met his wife’s words.



There happened to him at that instant what does happen to people when

they are unexpectedly caught in something very disgraceful. He did not

succeed in adapting his face to the position in which he was placed

towards his wife by the discovery of his fault. Instead of being hurt,

denying, defending himself, begging forgiveness, instead of remaining

indifferent even—anything would have been better than what he did do—his

face utterly involuntarily (reflex spinal action, reflected Stepan

Arkadyevitch, who was fond of physiology)—utterly involuntarily assumed

its habitual, good-humored, and therefore idiotic smile.



This idiotic smile he could not forgive himself. Catching sight of that

smile, Dolly shuddered as though at physical pain, broke out with her

characteristic heat into a flood of cruel words, and rushed out of the

room. Since then she had refused to see her husband.



"It’s that idiotic smile that’s to blame for it all," thought Stepan

Arkadyevitch.



"But what’s to be done? What’s to be done?" he said to himself in

despair, and found no answer.


Stepan Arkadyevitch was a truthful man in his relations with himself. He
was incapable of deceiving himself and persuading himself that he
repented of his conduct. He could not at this date repent of the fact
that he, a handsome, susceptible man of thirty-four, was not in love
with his wife, the mother of five living and two dead children, and only
a year younger than himself. All he repented of was that he had not
succeeded better in hiding it from his wife. But he felt all the
difficulty of his position and was sorry for his wife, his children, and
himself. Possibly he might have managed to conceal his sins better from
his wife if he had anticipated that the knowledge of them would have had
such an effect on her. He had never clearly thought out the subject, but
he had vaguely conceived that his wife must long ago have suspected him
of being unfaithful to her, and shut her eyes to the fact. He had even
supposed that she, a worn-out woman no longer young or good-looking, and
in no way remarkable or interesting, merely a good mother, ought from a
sense of fairness to take an indulgent view. It had turned out quite the
other way.

"Oh, it’s awful! oh dear, oh dear! awful!" Stepan Arkadyevitch kept
repeating to himself, and he could think of nothing to be done. "And how
well things were going up till now! how well we got on! She was
contented and happy in her children; I never interfered with her in
anything; I let her manage the children and the house just as she liked.
It’s true it’s bad _her_ having been a governess in our house. That’s
bad! There’s something common, vulgar, in flirting with one’s governess.
But what a governess!" (He vividly recalled the roguish black eyes of
Mlle. Roland and her smile.) "But after all, while she was in the house,
I kept myself in hand. And the worst of it all is that she’s already ...
it seems as if ill-luck would have it so! Oh, oh! But what, what is to
be done?"

There was no solution, but that universal solution which life gives to
all questions, even the most complex and insoluble. That answer is: one
must live in the needs of the day—that is, forget oneself. To forget
himself in sleep was impossible now, at least till nighttime; he could
not go back now to the music sung by the decanter-women; so he must
forget himself in the dream of daily life.

"Then we shall see," Stepan Arkadyevitch said to himself, and getting up
he put on a gray dressing-gown lined with blue silk, tied the tassels in
a knot, and, drawing a deep breath of air into his broad, bare chest, he
walked to the window with his usual confident step, turning out his feet
that carried his full frame so easily. He pulled up the blind and rang
the bell loudly. It was at once answered by the appearance of an old
friend, his valet, Matvey, carrying his clothes, his boots, and a
telegram. Matvey was followed by the barber with all the necessaries for
shaving.

"Are there any papers from the office?" asked Stepan Arkadyevitch,
taking the telegram and seating himself at the looking-glass.

"On the table," replied Matvey, glancing with inquiring sympathy at his
master; and, after a short pause, he added with a sly smile, "They’ve
sent from the carriage-jobbers."

Stepan Arkadyevitch made no reply, he merely glanced at Matvey in the
looking-glass. In the glance, in which their eyes met in the
looking-glass, it was clear that they understood one another. Stepan
Arkadyevitch’s eyes asked: "Why do you tell me that? don’t you know?"

Matvey put his hands in his jacket pockets, thrust out one leg, and
gazed silently, good-humoredly, with a faint smile, at his master.

"I told them to come on Sunday, and till then not to trouble you or
themselves for nothing," he said. He had obviously prepared the sentence
beforehand.

Stepan Arkadyevitch saw Matvey wanted to make a joke and attract
attention to himself. Tearing open the telegram, he read it through,
guessing at the words, misspelt as they always are in telegrams, and his
face brightened.

"Matvey, my sister Anna Arkadyevna will be here tomorrow," he said,
checking for a minute the sleek, plump hand of the barber, cutting a
pink path through his long, curly whiskers.

"Thank God!" said Matvey, showing by this response that he, like his
master, realized the significance of this arrival—that is, that Anna
Arkadyevna, the sister he was so fond of, might bring about a
reconciliation between husband and wife.

"Alone, or with her husband?" inquired Matvey.

Stepan Arkadyevitch could not answer, as the barber was at work on his
upper lip, and he raised one finger. Matvey nodded at the looking-glass.

"Alone. Is the room to be got ready upstairs?"

"Inform Darya Alexandrovna: where she orders."

"Darya Alexandrovna?" Matvey repeated, as though in doubt.

"Yes, inform her. Here, take the telegram; give it to her, and then do
what she tells you."

"You want to try it on," Matvey understood, but he only said, "Yes sir."

Stepan Arkadyevitch was already washed and combed and ready to be
dressed, when Matvey, stepping deliberately in his creaky boots, came
back into the room with the telegram in his hand. The barber had gone.

"Darya Alexandrovna told me to inform you that she is going away. Let
him do—that is you—do as he likes," he said, laughing only with his
eyes, and putting his hands in his pockets, he watched his master with
his head on one side. Stepan Arkadyevitch was silent a minute. Then a
good-humored and rather pitiful smile showed itself on his handsome
face.

"Eh, Matvey?" he said, shaking his head.

"It’s all right, sir; she will come round," said Matvey.

"Come round?"

"Yes, sir."

"Do you think so? Who’s there?" asked Stepan Arkadyevitch, hearing the
rustle of a woman’s dress at the door.

"It’s I," said a firm, pleasant, woman’s voice, and the stern,
pockmarked face of Matrona Philimonovna, the nurse, was thrust in at the
doorway.

"Well, what is it, Matrona?" queried Stepan Arkadyevitch, going up to
her at the door.

Although Stepan Arkadyevitch was completely in the wrong as regards his
wife, and was conscious of this himself, almost every one in the house
(even the nurse, Darya Alexandrovna’s chief ally) was on his side.

"Well, what now?" he asked disconsolately.

"Go to her, sir; own your fault again. Maybe God will aid you. She is
suffering so, it’s sad to see her; and besides, everything in the house
is topsy-turvy. You must have pity, sir, on the children. Beg her
forgiveness, sir. There’s no help for it! One must take the
consequences..."

"But she won’t see me."

"You do your part. God is merciful; pray to God, sir, pray to God."

"Come, that’ll do, you can go," said Stepan Arkadyevitch, blushing
suddenly. "Well now, do dress me." He turned to Matvey and threw off his
dressing-gown decisively.

Matvey was already holding up the shirt like a horse’s collar, and,
blowing off some invisible speck, he slipped it with obvious pleasure
over the well-groomed body of his master.



Chapter 3


When he was dressed, Stepan Arkadyevitch sprinkled some scent on
himself, pulled down his shirt-cuffs, distributed into his pockets his
cigarettes, pocketbook, matches, and watch with its double chain and
seals, and shaking out his handkerchief, feeling himself clean,
fragrant, healthy, and physically at ease, in spite of his unhappiness,
he walked with a slight swing on each leg into the dining-room, where
coffee was already waiting for him, and beside the coffee, letters and
papers from the office.

He read the letters. One was very unpleasant, from a merchant who was
buying a forest on his wife’s property. To sell this forest was
absolutely essential; but at present, until he was reconciled with his
wife, the subject could not be discussed. The most unpleasant thing of
all was that his pecuniary interests should in this way enter into the
question of his reconciliation with his wife. And the idea that he might
be led on by his interests, that he might seek a reconciliation with his
wife on account of the sale of the forest—that idea hurt him.

When he had finished his letters, Stepan Arkadyevitch moved the
office-papers close to him, rapidly looked through two pieces of
business, made a few notes with a big pencil, and pushing away the
papers, turned to his coffee. As he sipped his coffee, he opened a still
damp morning paper, and began reading it.

Stepan Arkadyevitch took in and read a liberal paper, not an extreme
one, but one advocating the views held by the majority. And in spite of
the fact that science, art, and politics had no special interest for
him, he firmly held those views on all these subjects which were held by
the majority and by his paper, and he only changed them when the
majority changed them—or, more strictly speaking, he did not change
them, but they imperceptibly changed of themselves within him.

Stepan Arkadyevitch had not chosen his political opinions or his views;
these political opinions and views had come to him of themselves, just
as he did not choose the shapes of his hat and coat, but simply took
those that were being worn. And for him, living in a certain
society—owing to the need, ordinarily developed at years of discretion,
for some degree of mental activity—to have views was just as
indispensable as to have a hat. If there was a reason for his preferring
liberal to conservative views, which were held also by many of his
circle, it arose not from his considering liberalism more rational, but
from its being in closer accordance with his manner of life. The liberal
party said that in Russia everything is wrong, and certainly Stepan
Arkadyevitch had many debts and was decidedly short of money. The
liberal party said that marriage is an institution quite out of date,
and that it needs reconstruction; and family life certainly afforded
Stepan Arkadyevitch little gratification, and forced him into lying and
hypocrisy, which was so repulsive to his nature. The liberal party said,
or rather allowed it to be understood, that religion is only a curb to
keep in check the barbarous classes of the people; and Stepan
Arkadyevitch could not get through even a short service without his legs
aching from standing up, and could never make out what was the object of
all the terrible and high-flown language about another world when life
might be so very amusing in this world. And with all this, Stepan
Arkadyevitch, who liked a joke, was fond of puzzling a plain man by
saying that if he prided himself on his origin, he ought not to stop at
Rurik and disown the first founder of his family—the monkey. And so
Liberalism had become a habit of Stepan Arkadyevitch’s, and he liked his
newspaper, as he did his cigar after dinner, for the slight fog it
diffused in his brain. He read the leading article, in which it was
maintained that it was quite senseless in our day to raise an outcry
that radicalism was threatening to swallow up all conservative elements,
and that the government ought to take measures to crush the
revolutionary hydra; that, on the contrary, "in our opinion the danger
lies not in that fantastic revolutionary hydra, but in the obstinacy of
traditionalism clogging progress," etc., etc. He read another article,
too, a financial one, which alluded to Bentham and Mill, and dropped
some innuendoes reflecting on the ministry. With his characteristic
quickwittedness he caught the drift of each innuendo, divined whence it
came, at whom and on what ground it was aimed, and that afforded him, as
it always did, a certain satisfaction. But today that satisfaction was
embittered by Matrona Philimonovna’s advice and the unsatisfactory state
of the household. He read, too, that Count Beist was rumored to have
left for Wiesbaden, and that one need have no more gray hair, and of the
sale of a light carriage, and of a young person seeking a situation; but
these items of information did not give him, as usual, a quiet, ironical
gratification. Having finished the paper, a second cup of coffee and a
roll and butter, he got up, shaking the crumbs of the roll off his
waistcoat; and, squaring his broad chest, he smiled joyously: not
because there was anything particularly agreeable in his mind—the joyous
smile was evoked by a good digestion.

But this joyous smile at once recalled everything to him, and he grew
thoughtful.

Two childish voices (Stepan Arkadyevitch recognized the voices of
Grisha, his youngest boy, and Tanya, his eldest girl) were heard outside
the door. They were carrying something, and dropped it.

"I told you not to sit passengers on the roof," said the little girl in
English; "there, pick them up!"

"Everything’s in confusion," thought Stepan Arkadyevitch; "there are the
children running about by themselves." And going to the door, he called
them. They threw down the box, that represented a train, and came in to
their father.

The little girl, her father’s favorite, ran up boldly, embraced him, and
hung laughingly on his neck, enjoying as she always did the smell of
scent that came from his whiskers. At last the little girl kissed his
face, which was flushed from his stooping posture and beaming with
tenderness, loosed her hands, and was about to run away again; but her
father held her back.

"How is mamma?" he asked, passing his hand over his daughter’s smooth,
soft little neck. "Good morning," he said, smiling to the boy, who had
come up to greet him. He was conscious that he loved the boy less, and
always tried to be fair; but the boy felt it, and did not respond with a
smile to his father’s chilly smile.

"Mamma? She is up," answered the girl.

Stepan Arkadyevitch sighed. "That means that she’s not slept again all
night," he thought.

"Well, is she cheerful?"

The little girl knew that there was a quarrel between her father and
mother, and that her mother could not be cheerful, and that her father
must be aware of this, and that he was pretending when he asked about it
so lightly. And she blushed for her father. He at once perceived it, and
blushed too.

"I don’t know," she said. "She did not say we must do our lessons, but
she said we were to go for a walk with Miss Hoole to grandmamma’s."

"Well, go, Tanya, my darling. Oh, wait a minute, though," he said, still
holding her and stroking her soft little hand.

He took off the mantelpiece, where he had put it yesterday, a little box
of sweets, and gave her two, picking out her favorites, a chocolate and
a fondant.

"For Grisha?" said the little girl, pointing to the chocolate.

"Yes, yes." And still stroking her little shoulder, he kissed her on the
roots of her hair and neck, and let her go.

"The carriage is ready," said Matvey; "but there’s some one to see you
with a petition."

"Been here long?" asked Stepan Arkadyevitch.

"Half an hour."

"How many times have I told you to tell me at once?"

"One must let you drink your coffee in peace, at least," said Matvey, in
the affectionately gruff tone with which it was impossible to be angry.

"Well, show the person up at once," said Oblonsky, frowning with
vexation.

The petitioner, the widow of a staff captain Kalinin, came with a
request impossible and unreasonable; but Stepan Arkadyevitch, as he
generally did, made her sit down, heard her to the end attentively
without interrupting her, and gave her detailed advice as to how and to
whom to apply, and even wrote her, in his large, sprawling, good and
legible hand, a confident and fluent little note to a personage who
might be of use to her. Having got rid of the staff captain’s widow,
Stepan Arkadyevitch took his hat and stopped to recollect whether he had
forgotten anything. It appeared that he had forgotten nothing except
what he wanted to forget—his wife.

"Ah, yes!" He bowed his head, and his handsome face assumed a harassed
expression. "To go, or not to go!" he said to himself; and an inner
voice told him he must not go, that nothing could come of it but
falsity; that to amend, to set right their relations was impossible,
because it was impossible to make her attractive again and able to
inspire love, or to make him an old man, not susceptible to love. Except
deceit and lying nothing could come of it now; and deceit and lying were
opposed to his nature.

"It must be some time, though: it can’t go on like this," he said,
trying to give himself courage. He squared his chest, took out a
cigarette, took two whiffs at it, flung it into a mother-of-pearl
ashtray, and with rapid steps walked through the drawing room, and
opened the other door into his wife’s bedroom.



Chapter 4


Darya Alexandrovna, in a dressing jacket, and with her now scanty, once
luxuriant and beautiful hair fastened up with hairpins on the nape of
her neck, with a sunken, thin face and large, startled eyes, which
looked prominent from the thinness of her face, was standing among a
litter of all sorts of things scattered all over the room, before an
open bureau, from which she was taking something. Hearing her husband’s
steps, she stopped, looking towards the door, and trying assiduously to
give her features a severe and contemptuous expression. She felt she was
afraid of him, and afraid of the coming interview. She was just
attempting to do what she had attempted to do ten times already in these
last three days—to sort out the children’s things and her own, so as to
take them to her mother’s—and again she could not bring herself to do
this; but now again, as each time before, she kept saying to herself,
"that things cannot go on like this, that she must take some step" to
punish him, put him to shame, avenge on him some little part at least of
the suffering he had caused her. She still continued to tell herself
that she should leave him, but she was conscious that this was
impossible; it was impossible because she could not get out of the habit
of regarding him as her husband and loving him. Besides this, she
realized that if even here in her own house she could hardly manage to
look after her five children properly, they would be still worse off
where she was going with them all. As it was, even in the course of
these three days, the youngest was unwell from being given unwholesome
soup, and the others had almost gone without their dinner the day
before. She was conscious that it was impossible to go away; but,
cheating herself, she went on all the same sorting out her things and
pretending she was going.

Seeing her husband, she dropped her hands into the drawer of the bureau
as though looking for something, and only looked round at him when he
had come quite up to her. But her face, to which she tried to give a
severe and resolute expression, betrayed bewilderment and suffering.

"Dolly!" he said in a subdued and timid voice. He bent his head towards
his shoulder and tried to look pitiful and humble, but for all that he
was radiant with freshness and health. In a rapid glance she scanned his
figure that beamed with health and freshness. "Yes, he is happy and
content!" she thought; "while I.... And that disgusting good nature,
which every one likes him for and praises—I hate that good nature of
his," she thought. Her mouth stiffened, the muscles of the cheek
contracted on the right side of her pale, nervous face.

"What do you want?" she said in a rapid, deep, unnatural voice.

"Dolly!" he repeated, with a quiver in his voice. "Anna is coming
today."

"Well, what is that to me? I can’t see her!" she cried.

"But you must, really, Dolly..."

"Go away, go away, go away!" she shrieked, not looking at him, as though
this shriek were called up by physical pain.

Stepan Arkadyevitch could be calm when he thought of his wife, he could
hope that she would _come round_, as Matvey expressed it, and could
quietly go on reading his paper and drinking his coffee; but when he saw
her tortured, suffering face, heard the tone of her voice, submissive to
fate and full of despair, there was a catch in his breath and a lump in
his throat, and his eyes began to shine with tears.

"My God! what have I done? Dolly! For God’s sake!.... You know...." He
could not go on; there was a sob in his throat.

She shut the bureau with a slam, and glanced at him.

"Dolly, what can I say?.... One thing: forgive... Remember, cannot nine
years of my life atone for an instant...."

She dropped her eyes and listened, expecting what he would say, as it
were beseeching him in some way or other to make her believe
differently.

"—instant of passion?" he said, and would have gone on, but at that
word, as at a pang of physical pain, her lips stiffened again, and again
the muscles of her right cheek worked.

"Go away, go out of the room!" she shrieked still more shrilly, "and
don’t talk to me of your passion and your loathsomeness."

She tried to go out, but tottered, and clung to the back of a chair to
support herself. His face relaxed, his lips swelled, his eyes were
swimming with tears.

"Dolly!" he said, sobbing now; "for mercy’s sake, think of the children;
they are not to blame! I am to blame, and punish me, make me expiate my
fault. Anything I can do, I am ready to do anything! I am to blame, no
words can express how much I am to blame! But, Dolly, forgive me!"

She sat down. He listened to her hard, heavy breathing, and he was
unutterably sorry for her. She tried several times to begin to speak,
but could not. He waited.

"You remember the children, Stiva, to play with them; but I remember
them, and know that this means their ruin," she said—obviously one of
the phrases she had more than once repeated to herself in the course of
the last few days.

She had called him "Stiva," and he glanced at her with gratitude, and
moved to take her hand, but she drew back from him with aversion.

"I think of the children, and for that reason I would do anything in the
world to save them, but I don’t myself know how to save them. By taking
them away from their father, or by leaving them with a vicious
father—yes, a vicious father.... Tell me, after what ... has happened,
can we live together? Is that possible? Tell me, eh, is it possible?"
she repeated, raising her voice, "after my husband, the father of my
children, enters into a love affair with his own children’s governess?"

"But what could I do? what could I do?" he kept saying in a pitiful
voice, not knowing what he was saying, as his head sank lower and lower.

"You are loathsome to me, repulsive!" she shrieked, getting more and
more heated. "Your tears mean nothing! You have never loved me; you have
neither heart nor honorable feeling! You are hateful to me, disgusting,
a stranger—yes, a complete stranger!" With pain and wrath she uttered
the word so terrible to herself—_stranger_.

He looked at her, and the fury expressed in her face alarmed and amazed
him. He did not understand how his pity for her exasperated her. She saw
in him sympathy for her, but not love. "No, she hates me. She will not
forgive me," he thought.

"It is awful! awful!" he said.

At that moment in the next room a child began to cry; probably it had
fallen down. Darya Alexandrovna listened, and her face suddenly
softened.

She seemed to be pulling herself together for a few seconds, as though
she did not know where she was, and what she was doing, and getting up
rapidly, she moved towards the door.

"Well, she loves my child," he thought, noticing the change of her face
at the child’s cry, "my child: how can she hate me?"

"Dolly, one word more," he said, following her.

"If you come near me, I will call in the servants, the children! They
may all know you are a scoundrel! I am going away at once, and you may
live here with your mistress!"

And she went out, slamming the door.

Stepan Arkadyevitch sighed, wiped his face, and with a subdued tread
walked out of the room. "Matvey says she will come round; but how? I
don’t see the least chance of it. Ah, oh, how horrible it is! And how
vulgarly she shouted," he said to himself, remembering her shriek and
the words—"scoundrel" and "mistress." "And very likely the maids were
listening! Horribly vulgar! horrible!" Stepan Arkadyevitch stood a few
seconds alone, wiped his face, squared his chest, and walked out of the
room.

It was Friday, and in the dining room the German watchmaker was winding
up the clock. Stepan Arkadyevitch remembered his joke about this
punctual, bald watchmaker, "that the German was wound up for a whole
lifetime himself, to wind up watches," and he smiled. Stepan
Arkadyevitch was fond of a joke: "And maybe she will come round! That’s
a good expression, ‘_come round,_’" he thought. "I must repeat that."

"Matvey!" he shouted. "Arrange everything with Darya in the sitting room
for Anna Arkadyevna," he said to Matvey when he came in.

"Yes, sir."

Stepan Arkadyevitch put on his fur coat and went out onto the steps.

"You won’t dine at home?" said Matvey, seeing him off.

"That’s as it happens. But here’s for the housekeeping," he said, taking
ten roubles from his pocketbook. "That’ll be enough."

"Enough or not enough, we must make it do," said Matvey, slamming the
carriage door and stepping back onto the steps.

Darya Alexandrovna meanwhile having pacified the child, and knowing from
the sound of the carriage that he had gone off, went back again to her
bedroom. It was her solitary refuge from the household cares which
crowded upon her directly she went out from it. Even now, in the short
time she had been in the nursery, the English governess and Matrona
Philimonovna had succeeded in putting several questions to her, which
did not admit of delay, and which only she could answer: "What were the
children to put on for their walk? Should they have any milk? Should not
a new cook be sent for?"

"Ah, let me alone, let me alone!" she said, and going back to her
bedroom she sat down in the same place as she had sat when talking to
her husband, clasping tightly her thin hands with the rings that slipped
down on her bony fingers, and fell to going over in her memory all the
conversation. "He has gone! But has he broken it off with her?" she
thought. "Can it be he sees her? Why didn’t I ask him! No, no,
reconciliation is impossible. Even if we remain in the same house, we
are strangers—strangers forever!" She repeated again with special
significance the word so dreadful to her. "And how I loved him! my God,
how I loved him!.... How I loved him! And now don’t I love him? Don’t I
love him more than before? The most horrible thing is," she began, but
did not finish her thought, because Matrona Philimonovna put her head in
at the door.

"Let us send for my brother," she said; "he can get a dinner anyway, or
we shall have the children getting nothing to eat till six again, like
yesterday."

"Very well, I will come directly and see about it. But did you send for
some new milk?"

And Darya Alexandrovna plunged into the duties of the day, and drowned
her grief in them for a time.





**************

Brenda's got a Baby

I hear Brenda's got a baby
But, Brenda's barely got a brain
A damn shame
The girl can hardly spell her name
(That's not our problem, that's up to Brenda's family)
Well let me show ya how it affects the whole community
Now Brenda really never knew her moms and her dad was a
junky
Went in death to his arms, it's sad
Cause I bet Brenda doesn't even know
Just cause your in the ghetto doesn't mean ya can't grow
But oh, that's a thought, my own revelation
Do whatever it takes to resist the temptation
Brenda got herself a boyfriend
Her boyfriend was her cousin, now lets watch the joy end
She tried to hide her pregnancy, from her family
Who didn't really care to see, or give a damn if she
Went out and had a church of kids
As long as when the check came they got first dibs
Now Brenda's belly is gettin bigger
But no one seems to notice any change in her figure
She's 12 years old and she's having a baby
In love with the molester, who's sexing her crazy
And yet she thinks that he'll be with her forever
And dreams of a world with the two of them are together,
whatever
He left her and she had the baby solo, she had it on the
bathroom floor
And didn't know so, she didn't know, what to throw away and
what to keep
She wrapped the baby up and threw him in the trash heep
I guess she thought she'd get away
Wouldn't hear the cries
She didn't realize
How much the the little baby had her eyes
Now the baby's in the trash heep balling
Momma can't help her, but it hurts to hear her calling
Brenda wants to run away
Momma say, you makin' me lose pay, the social workers here
everyday
Now Brenda's gotta make her own way
Can't go to her family, they won't let her stay
No money no babysitter, she couldn't keep a job
She tried to sell crack, but end up getting robbed
So now what's next, there ain't nothing left to sell
So she sees sex as a way of leaving hell
It's paying the rent, so she really can't complain
Prostitute, found slain, and Brenda's her name, she's got a baby

Baby

(don't you know she's got a baby)
(don't you know she's got a baby)
(don't you know she's got a baby)
(don't you know she's got a baby)
(don't you know she's got a baby)
(don't you know she's got a baby) 

("Hard like an erection..." -- Ed O.G.) Young black male!
("Hard like an erection...")
("...ain't shit to fool with" -- Ice Cube)
("Hard like an erection...") Young black male!
("...ain't shit to fool with")
[runs backwards] Young black male!

[2Pac] Yes niggaz... yes niggaz... yes niggaz

Young black male!
("Hard like an erection...") Young black male!
("Hard like an erection...") ("...ain't shit to fool with")
("Hard like an erection...") Young black male!
("Hard like an erection...") ("...ain't shit to fool with")

[2Pac] Go nigga, go!!



Young black male
I try to effect by kicking the facts
and stacking much mail
I'm packing a gat cuz guys wanna jack
and fuck goin to jail
Cuz I ain't equipped to stop how I look
I don't sell ya-yo
They teachin a brother like I was in books
Follow me into a flow
I'm sure you know, which way to go
I'm hittin em out of the dopes
So slip on the slope, let's skip on the flow
I'm fuckin the sluts and hoes
The bigger the butts the tighter the clothes
The gimminy jimminy grows
Then whaddya know, it's off with some clothes
Rowd when the crowd says hoe
That let's me know, they know I can flow
Love when they come to my shows
I get up and go, with skins before
When I'm collecting my dough
I never respect, the one that I back
The quicker the nigga can rap
The bigger the check, now watch how they sweat
What kind of style is that?
The style of a mack, and ready to jack
I rendered up piles of black
The wacker the pack, the fatter the smack
I hate it when real nigga bust
They hate when I cuss, they threaten to bust
I had enough of the fuss
I bust what I bust, and cuss when I must
They gave me a charge for sales
For selling the tales... of young black males

Yes nigga, N-I-G-G-A niggaz

Ay nigga you can't handle that shit!
Pass that man!

Hit that shit, that's the shit!

It smell like skunk, skunk smell like that nigga momma

We ain't nuttin but some low down dirty niggaz
Keep it real nigga, fuck you nigga!
You ain't givin me near a dime on this real motherfucker
Fuck St. Ide's it's an Old E thing baby
Strictly some of that Hennesee

Can I drink with you fellas? Can I get it on it?

Fuck you capo. You ain't in baby.

I tell you what! You guys are not gonna be talking
all that shit, when I come back, OK?
We gonna say who the big mouth, when I come back

YOUNG BLACK MALE!


"Dear Mama"

You are appreciated

[Verse One: 2Pac]

When I was young me and my mama had beef
Seventeen years old kicked out on the streets
Though back at the time, I never thought I'd see her face
Ain't a woman alive that could take my mama's place
Suspended from school; and scared to go home, I was a fool
with the big boys, breakin all the rules
I shed tears with my baby sister
Over the years we was poorer than the other little kids
And even though we had different daddy's, the same drama
When things went wrong we'd blame mama
I reminice on the stress I caused, it was hell
Huggin on my mama from a jail cell
And who'd think in elementary?
Heeey! I see the penitentiary, one day
And runnin from the police, that's right
Mama catch me, put a whoopin to my backside
And even as a crack fiend, mama
You always was a black queen, mama
I finally understand
for a woman it ain't easy tryin to raise a man
You always was committed
A poor single mother on welfare, tell me how ya did it
There's no way I can pay you back
But the plan is to show you that I understand
You are appreciated

[Chorus: Reggie Green & "Sweet Franklin" w/ 2Pac]

Lady...
Don't cha know we love ya? Sweet lady
Dear mama
Place no one above ya, sweet lady
You are appreciated
Don't cha know we love ya?

[second and third chorus, "And dear mama" instead of "Dear mama"]

[Verse Two: 2Pac]

Now ain't nobody tell us it was fair
No love from my daddy cause the coward wasn't there
He passed away and I didn't cry, cause my anger
wouldn't let me feel for a stranger
They say I'm wrong and I'm heartless, but all along
I was lookin for a father he was gone
I hung around with the Thugs, and even though they sold drugs
They showed a young brother love
I moved out and started really hangin
I needed money of my own so I started slangin
I ain't guilty cause, even though I sell rocks
It feels good puttin money in your mailbox
I love payin rent when the rent's due
I hope ya got the diamond necklace that I sent to you
Cause when I was low you was there for me
And never left me alone because you cared for me
And I could see you comin home after work late
You're in the kitchen tryin to fix us a hot plate
Ya just workin with the scraps you was given
And mama made miracles every Thanksgivin
But now the road got rough, you're alone
You're tryin to raise two bad kids on your own
And there's no way I can pay you back
But my plan is to show you that I understand
You are appreciated

[Chorus]

[Verse Three: 2Pac]

Pour out some liquor and I reminsce, cause through the drama
I can always depend on my mama
And when it seems that I'm hopeless
You say the words that can get me back in focus
When I was sick as a little kid
To keep me happy there's no limit to the things you did
And all my childhood memories
Are full of all the sweet things you did for me
And even though I act craaazy
I gotta thank the Lord that you made me
There are no words that can express how I feel
You never kept a secret, always stayed real
And I appreciate, how you raised me
And all the extra love that you gave me
I wish I could take the pain away
If you can make it through the night there's a brighter day
Everything will be alright if ya hold on
It's a struggle everyday, gotta roll on
And there's no way I can pay you back
But my plan is to show you that I understand
You are appreciated

[Chorus]

Sweet lady
And dear mama

Dear mama
Lady [3X]


"Thug Passion"
(feat. Dramacydal, Storm, Jewell)

[Intro: 2Pac]

Aight, new drink
one part alize one part cristal
Thugs Passion baby
y'all know what time it is
This drink is Guaranteed to get the pussy wet and the dick hard
now if you with me
Pour a glass and drink with a nigga
know what I mean ?
I ain't trying to turn you all niggas into alcoholics
Alcoholics (ha ha)
I'm just trying to turn you into motherfucking thugs
So come and get some of this thug passion Baby

[Verse One: Dramacydal]

I could pull out the drink
and be good 'till it's relevant but
I'm a straight solider, I'll roll up a nigga
like its Heaven sent
Tripping over dead presidents
they got these derelicts
I throw was down with this business
Tryin' clown and get a cent
and so rather
than stand forever, been thinking
drinking over a felony
and hell of me and how it will be some other shit
People telling me to cool out
But they ain't feeling me
a mother fucking fool 'bout
my fucking cheddar cheese
and it pleases, passion of mine
Thuggin huggin plenty of G's
and laughing while I pass through times
And all these back stabbers be watching
Just keep it plain
I'm a keep it the same partner
Just take it the simple game
I can pinkle with the rain twinkling
diamonds and thangs go plinklin
enough to hold me, til' I'm, old and wrinkling
and These adversaries
they gonna have to be worrying
cause I'm a be illing
Fulfilling my Passion
Till I'm burryin'
My Thug Passion

[Chorus: Jewell]

I heard it's the bomb
and you got it going on
give me some of your Thug Passion Baby
You got me dripping wet
from the way you make me sweat
give me some of your Thug Passion Baby
owwowwwowwww

[Verse Two: Dramacydal]

Now what if me
turn this Hennessy,
into a robbery
the Prophecy probably suddenly
switch and How it supposed to be?
And Dirty money
Can't be evil cause it's filling up my tummy see
Born in a position
Death collision
was futuristic
twisting riches
But there is only one way to make mo'
so I'm standing on the corner
trying to hustle in the snow
and My bigger bro
couldn't know
but buy a four four
blasting at player hating
wantin' mo'
with a Thug Passion

[Verse Three: 2Pac]

Putting down mashin'
control by this Thug's Passion
unlike them other busters pistol blastin'
I'm asking, What Happened?
To the niggas who kept it real
like they claim to
that's when I bang do
see thang true
Traveling this road my poor soul
has been consolidated
with all this bullshit I done tolerated
How I made it
can easily stated
it's like my heart be gripped with the Passion
to be the fucking greatest
Load up and take shit

[Dramacydal]

Make this to some high dollar gangster shit
jack a stack till we got enough bank to split

[Verse Four: Storm]

Creep with me
through that Immortal flow
Thug Passion got you tremblin'
like Death on the Row
make your move
so I can throw your mind a curve
while I'll be blowing up the scene
like my nigga Mr. Herb
take a toke
as your heart goes full arrest
I got the bomb
so nigga, fuck the rest
you need a thug to get you flowin'
and let that loc see smoke
feelin' the strokes of the nine squeeze tight and slow

[Chorus]

[Verse Five: 2Pac]

They say money don't make the man
but damn I'm makin' money
observin' you motherfuckers
cause some of you bitches funny
say you want it
but you bullshitin'
lickin' them lips
you got me about to act a fool quick
sippin' on some Alize and Cristal, meanwhile
buy me a drink
and get to winking at me
she smiles
a niggas full of passion
Satisfaction is everlastin'
How does it feel?
what I'm askin'
while I'm rubbin' on that ass
why you laughin'?
see, I'm diggin' as if I'm curious
full blown and furious
baby get a grip
when I be doin' this
It's so physical
my attraction
driven by alcohol
beware of my reaction
baby I'm born to ball
thugged out on Death Row
You better recognize
and picture what I said so
Now you can feel it
it's a potion for my niggas in motion
forever blastin'
bitches ain't ready for this Thug Passion

[Chorus 4X]

"All Eyez On Me"
(feat. Syke)

['Pac talking]
Big Syke, Newt, Hank
Beugard, Big Sur (yeah)
Y'all know how this shit go (y'know)
{All Eyez On Me}
Motherfuckin O.G.
Roll up in the club and shit (is that right?)
{All Eyez On Me}
{All Eyez On Me}
But you know what?

[2Pac]
I bet you got it twisted you don't know who to trust
So many playa hating niggaz tryin to sound like us
Say they ready for the funk, but I don't think they knowin
Straight to the depths of hell is where those cowards goin
Well are you still down nigga? Holla when you see me
And let these devils be sorry for the day they finally freed me
I got a caravan of niggaz every time we ride (every time we ride)
Hittin motherfuckers up when we pass by (when we pass by)
Until I die; live the life of a boss playa
Cause even when I'm high, fuck with me and get crossed later
The futures in my eyes, cause all I want is cash and thangs
A five-double-oh - Benz flauntin flashy rings, uhh
Bitches pursue me like a dream
Been know to disappear before your eyes just like a dope fiend
It seems - my main thang was to be major paid
The game sharper than a motherfuckin razor blade
Say money bring bitches, bitches bring lies
One nigga's gettin jealous, and motherfuckers died
Depend on me like the first and fifteenth
They might hold me for a second, but these punks won't get me
We got foe niggaz, and lowriders, in ski masks
screamin Thug Life every time they pass {All Eyez On Me}

[Chorus One: 2Pac]

Live the life of a thug nigga, until the day I die
live the life of a boss playa {All Eyez On Me}
cause even gettin high.. ..{All Eyez On Me}
Live the life of a thug nigga, until the day I die
live the life of a boss playa, cause even gettin high..

[Syke]
Heeyyy, to my nigga 'Pac..
So much trouble in the world, nigga
Can't nobody feel your pain
The world's changin everyday, times moving faaast
My girl said I need a raise, how long will she last?
I'm caught between my woman, and my pistol, and my chips
Triple beam, got some smokers on, whistle as I dip
I'm lost in the land with no plan, livin life flawless
Crime boss, contraband, let me toss this
Needy hookers got a lot of nerve, let my bucket swerve
I'm takin off from the curb
The nervousness neglect make me pack a tec
Devoted to servin this, Moet and paaayyy-checks
Like Akai satellite nigga I'm forever ballin
It ain't right parasites triggers and fleas crawlin
Sucker duck and get busted, no emotion
My devotion is handlin my business nigga keep on coastin
Where you goin I been there came back as lonely homie
Steady flowin against the grain niggaz STILL don't know me
It's about the money in this rap shit, this crap shit
It ain't funny niggaz don't even know how to act - shit!
What can I do, what can I say, is there another way?
Blunts and gin all day, twenty-fo' parlay
My little homie G, can't you see, I'm busta free
Niggaz can't stand me - all eyes on me!

[Chorus Two: 2Pac]

I live the life of a thug nigga, until the day I die
Live the life as a boss playa {All Eyez On Me}
cause even gettin high {All Eyez On Me}
I live the life of a thug nigga, until the day I die
live the life as a boss playa {All Eyez On Me}
cause even gettin high

[2Pac]
The feds is watchin, niggaz plottin to get me
Will I survive, will I die? Come on let's picture the possibility
Givin me charges, lawyers makin a grip
I told the judge I was raised wrong, and that's why I blaze shit
Was hyper as a kid, cold as a teenager
On my mobile callin big shots on the scene major
Packing hundreds in my drawers; fuck the law
Bitches I fuck with a passion, I'm livin rough and raw
Catchin cases at a fast rate, ballin in the fast lane
Hustle til the mornin, never stopped until the cash came
Live my life as a thug nigga, until the day I die
Live my life as a boss playa, cause even gettin high
these niggaz got me tossin shit
I put the top down, now it's time to floss my shit
Keep your head up nigga, make these motherfuckers suffer
Up in the Benz burnin rubber
The money is mandatory, the hoes is fully strapped
This criminal lifestyle, equipped with the bulletproof vest
Make sure your eyes is on the meal ticket
Get your money motherfucker let's get rich and we'll kick it
All eyes on me!

[Chorus Three: 2Pac]

I live the life as a thug nigga, until the day I die
Live the life as a boss playa {All Eyez On Me}
cause even gettin high.. ..{All Eyez On Me}
I live the life as a thug nigga, until the day I die
Live the life as a boss playa {All Eyez On Me}
cause even gettin high.. ..{All Eyez On Me}

['Pac talking]
Pay attention my niggaz
See how that shit go? Nigga walk up in this motherfucker
and it be like "bing!"
Cops.. bitches.. everymotherfuckinbody
[overlap]
Live my life as a thug nigga, until the day I die
Live my life as a boss playa, cause even gettin high
I got bustas hoes and police watchin a nigga y'know?
[overlap]
I live my life as a thug nigga, until the day I die
Livin life as a boss playa, cause even gettin high
{All Eyez On Me}
Hehehe.. it's like what they think?
I'm walkin around with some ki's in my pocket or somethin?
{All Eyez On Me}
They think I'm goin back to jail, they REALLY on that dope
[overlap]
Live my life as a thug nigga, until the day I die
Live my life as a boss playa
I know y'all watchin, I know y'all got me in the scopes
[overlap]
Live my life as a thug nigga, until the day I die
Live my life as a boss playa, cause even gettin high
I know y'all know this is Thug Life baayy-bay
Y'all got me under surveillance huh?
{All Eyez On Me}
But I'm knowin

"Holla If Ya Hear Me"

Aww yeah, uhh, uhh
Holla if ya hear me, yeah!

[Verse One]
Here we go, turn it up, let's start
From block to block we snatchin hearts and jackin marks
And the punk police can't fade me, and maybe
We can have peace someday G
But right now I got my mind set up
Lookin down the barrel of my nine, get up
Cause it's time to make the payback fat
To my brothers on the block better stay strapped, black
And accept no substitutes
I bring truth to the youth tear the roof off the whole school
Oh no, I won't turn the other cheek
In case ya can't see us while we burn the other week
Now we got him in a smash, blast
How long will it last 'til the po' gettin mo' cash
Until then, raise up!
Tell my young black males, blaze up!
Life's a mess don't stress, test
I'm givin but be thankful that you're livin, blessed
Much love to my brothers in the pen
See ya when I free ya if not when they shove me in
Once again it's an all out scrap
Keep your hands on ya gat, and now ya boys watch ya back
Cause in the alleys out in Cali I'ma tell ya
Mess with the best and the vest couldn't help ya
Scream, if ya feel me; see it clearly?
You're too near me -

[Chorus]
[2Pac] Holla if ya hear me!
"Hard!" .. "Tellin you to hear it, the rebel" - P.E.
"Tellin you to hear it.."
[2Pac] Holla if ya hear me!
"Hard!" .. "Tellin you to hear it, the rebel" - P.E.
"Tellin you to hear it.."
[2Pac] Holla if ya hear me!
"Hard!" .. "Tellin you to hear it, the rebel" - P.E.
"Tellin you to hear it.."

[Verse Two]
Pump ya fists like this
Holla if ya hear me - PUMP PUMP if you're pissed
To the sell-outs, livin it up
One way or another you'll be givin it up, huh
I guess cause I'm black born
I'm supposed to say peace, sing songs, and get capped on
But it's time for a new plan, BAM!
I'll be swingin like a one man, clan
Here we go, turn it up, don't stop
To my homies on the block gettin dropped by cops
I'm still around for ya
Keepin my sound underground for ya
And I'ma throw a change up
Quayle, like you never brought my name up
Now my homies in the backstreets, the blackstreets
They fell me when they rollin in they fat jeeps
This ain't just a rap song, a black song
Tellin all my brothers, get they strap on
And look for me in the struggle
Hustlin 'til other brothers bubble -

[Chorus]
[2Pac] Holla if ya hear me!
"Tellin you to hear it, the rebel" - P.E.
"Tellin you to hear it.."
[2Pac] Holla if ya hear me!
"Hard!" .. "Tellin you to hear it, the rebel" - P.E.
"Tellin you to hear it.."
[2Pac] Holla if ya hear me!
"Hard!" .. "Tellin you to hear it, the rebel" - P.E.
"Tellin you to hear it.."
[2Pac] Holla if ya hear me!
"Hard!" .. "Tellin you to hear it, the rebel" - P.E.
"Tellin you to hear it.."
[2Pac] Holla if ya hear me!

[Verse Three]
Will I quit, will I quit?
They claim that I'm violent, but still I keep
representin, never give up, on a good thing
Wouldn't stop it if we could it's a hood thing
And now I'm like a major threat
Cause I remind you of the things you were made to forget
Bring the noise, to all my boyz
Know the real from the bustas and the decoys
And if ya hustle like a real G
Pump ya fists if ya feel me, holla if ya hear me
Learn to survive in the nine-tre'
I make rhyme pay, others make crime pay
Whatever it takes to live and stand
Cause nobody else'll give a damn
So we live like caged beasts
Waitin for the day to let the rage free
Still me, till they kill me
I love it when they fear me -

[Chorus]
[2Pac] Holla if ya hear me!
"Tellin you to hear it, the rebel" - P.E.
"Tellin you to hear it.."
[2Pac] Holla if ya hear me!
"Hard!" .. "Tellin you to hear it, the rebel" - P.E.
"Tellin you to hear it.."
[2Pac] Holla if ya hear me!
"Hard!" .. "Tellin you to hear it, the rebel" - P.E.
"Tellin you to hear it.."
[2Pac] Holla if ya hear me!
"Hard!" .. "Tellin you to hear it, the rebel" - P.E.
"Tellin you to hear it.."

[2Pac] You're too near me, to see it clearly

[repeat 4x]
[2Pac] Holla if ya hear me!
"Hard!" .. "Tellin you to hear it, the rebel" - P.E.
"Tellin you to hear it.."

[repeat 2X]
"Hard!" .. "Tellin you to hear it, the rebel" - P.E.
"Tellin you to hear it.."

"Hard!" .. "The rebel"
"Hard!" .. "The rebel"

[repeat 12X to fade]
[2Pac] Holla if ya hear me!
"Hard!" .. "The rebel"











